terminology.md, before:

# WoT Terminology

This document serves for faster iterations and discussions of our terminology, as the WoT Architecture document has a stricter merging policy and the GitHub wiki is not writeable for non-editors.

Please provide pull requests for comments (`> ` prefix) or proposals to the terminology.

## IoT platform
A specific IoT ecosystem such as OCF, oneM2M, or Mozilla Project Things with its own specifications for application-facing APIs, data model, and protocols or protocol configurations.

## TD
See Thing Description

## Thing Description (TD)
Structured data describing a physical device or software service (WoT Thing) that includes metadata, links to domain-specific vocabulary, a list of offered interactions, the supported protocol bindings for each interaction, and links to related Things.

## Interaction Model
A formal model to semantically and syntactically describe network application interfaces. The Thing Description is built around this model.

## Interaction
A functionality exposed over the network that is described by the TD Interaction Model.

## Interaction Pattern
A default solution to describe common interactions: Property, Action, Event.

## Property
An Interaction to read a specific value of a Thing and optionally to write it.

## Action
An Interaction to invoke procedure on a Thing, potentially a long running physical process (e.g., lowering of window blinds).

## Event
An Interaction to subscribe to data pushed by a WoT Server. These can be stand-alone events such as an alarm, change-of-value notifications, or time series of data.

## JSON-LD
A JSON document that is augmented with support for Linked Data by providing an `@context` property with a defining URI [JSON-LD](https://www.w3.org/TR/json-ld/).

## RDF
The Resource Description Framework (RDF) of the Semantic Web [rdf11-concepts](https://www.w3.org/TR/rdf11-concepts/)

## Thing
An entity (either a physical device or a software service) whose metadata and interfaces are described by a WoT Thing Description. A Thing can be an existing device (or service) augmented by a Thing Description or an entity that that natively implements WoT building blocks (e.g., Protocol Bindings or the Scripting API).

## Servient
An entity that implements WoT building blocks and both consumes Things and exposes one or more Things. Servients usually have multiple Protocol Bindings to enable interaction with different devices. Servients can implement the Scripting API.

## WoT Server
An entity that exposes a network interface consistent with a WoT Thing Description. A Thing is at least a WoT Server. WoT Server is also used to refer to a Servient in server role only.

## WoT Client
An entity that can connect with ("consume") a network interface described by a WoT Thing Description. WoT Clients usually implement multiple Protocol Bindings. WoT Client is also used to refer to a Servient in client role only.

## Binding Templates
A re-usable collection of blueprints for the communication with different IoT platforms. The blueprints includes the required vocabulary for the Thing Description to map Interactions to platform-specific messages as well as implementation notes for the required protocol stacks or dedicated communication drivers.

## Protocol Binding
An implementation of the mapping between Interaction in the TD Interaction Model (e.g., Property read) and specific operations of a protocol (e.g., HTTP GET).

## Application
A running or periodically running process that consumes one or more Things (read and processes there data, control their state) and/or exposes on or more Things (provide access to locally gathered data or computed from consumed Things, provide remote control and management interfaces). The application can be implemented using the Scripting API or native platform APIs. The application may also be distributed over multiple Things and other hosts.

## Scripting API
The application-facing programming interface provided by a Servient; comparable to the Web browser APIs.

## Execution Environment
A sandbox that isolates scripts running on the same Servient.

## Client API
Programming interface that allows scripts to access remote Things over the network, local Things in a different execution environment, or directly attached hardware (which as abstracted as Things).

## Server API
Programming interface that allows scripts to expose local functionality as Things to WoT Clients.

## Exposed Thing
A software object instance created through the Server API that is implemented locally and can be accessed over the network by remote WoT Clients.

## Consumed Thing
A software object instance created through the Client API that represents a remote Thing that is used by the local application.

## Discovery API
Programming interface that allows scripts to discover other Things (local, nearby, or remote).

## Manual Discovery
A discovery method where the URI of the used consumed Thing Descriptions is provided manually (e.g., through user configuration or hard-coding in a script).

## Local Discovery
A discovery method which can discover Things in local networks (e.g. SSDP, mDNS/DNS-SD, ...).

> Matthias: I think we need to distinguish between "local" (i.e., local hardware, same Servient) and "network" (i.e., what is described here)

## Nearby Discovery
A discovery method where the physical location is considered (e.g., BLE, Audio Watermarking, ...).

## Remote Discovery
A discovery method which supports lookup of remote Things also beyond network boundaries, for instance by using a directory service. The endpoint of the directory must be supported.

## TD Repository
A directory service for TDs that provides a Web interface to register TDs (see [draft-ietf-core-resource-directory](https://tools.ietf.org/html/draft-ietf-core-resource-directory)) and look them up (e.g., using SPARQL queries).

## CoAP
Acronym for Constrained Application Protocol [RFC7252]

## JWT
JSON Web Token [RFC7519]

## CWT
CBOR Web Token [draft-ietf-ace-cbor-web-token](https://tools.ietf.org/html/draft-ietf-ace-cbor-web-token)

Commit message:

Proposed redefinition of "Thing" vs. "Servient"
1. modified "links to domain-specific vocabulary" ("Thing Description"). It would be more accurate to say some of the metadata *is expressed* using domain-specific vocabularies.

2. proposed a new definition for "Thing" (main change). Details:

In the current version, the definitions for Thing and Servient are redundant: a Thing is "an entity that that natively implements WoT building blocks (e.g., Protocol Bindings or the Scripting API)." while a Servient is "an entity that implements WoT building blocks".

In the proposed definition, the servient is the software agent and the Thing is the physical entity (with possibly no computational power itself). The Internet of Things was first used to describe the phenomenon that non-computational objects get a digital representation via RFID tags. See Kevin Ashton's article about it: http://www.rfidjournal.com/articles/view?4986. From this perspective, a bottle, a can or any manufactured product can become a "Thing" as long as it has a digital tag (which is not even mandatory if we consider computer vision). To remain aligned with this idea, I think it is important that we define a WoT Thing in such an abstract way that it can be "any physical entity".

terminology.md, after:

# WoT Terminology

This document serves for faster iterations and discussions of our terminology, as the WoT Architecture document has a stricter merging policy and the GitHub wiki is not writeable for non-editors.

Please provide pull requests for comments (`> ` prefix) or proposals to the terminology.

## IoT platform
A specific IoT ecosystem such as OCF, oneM2M, or Mozilla Project Things with its own specifications for application-facing APIs, data model, and protocols or protocol configurations.

## TD
See Thing Description

## Thing Description (TD)
Structured data describing a physical device or software service (WoT Thing) that includes metadata, links to domain-specific vocabulary, a list of offered interactions, the supported protocol bindings for each interaction, and links to related Things.

> Structured data describing a physical entity (WoT Thing) that includes generic metadata, domain-specific metadata, a list of offered interactions, the supported protocol bindings for each interaction, and links to related Things.

## Interaction Model
A formal model to semantically and syntactically describe network application interfaces. The Thing Description is built around this model.

## Interaction
A functionality exposed over the network that is described by the TD Interaction Model.

## Interaction Pattern
A default solution to describe common interactions: Property, Action, Event.

## Property
An Interaction to read a specific value of a Thing and optionally to write it.

## Action
An Interaction to invoke procedure on a Thing, potentially a long running physical process (e.g., lowering of window blinds).

## Event
An Interaction to subscribe to data pushed by a WoT Server. These can be stand-alone events such as an alarm, change-of-value notifications, or time series of data.

## JSON-LD
A JSON document that is augmented with support for Linked Data by providing an `@context` property with a defining URI [JSON-LD](https://www.w3.org/TR/json-ld/).

## RDF
The Resource Description Framework (RDF) of the Semantic Web [rdf11-concepts](https://www.w3.org/TR/rdf11-concepts/)

## Thing
An entity (either a physical device or a software service) whose metadata and interfaces are described by a WoT Thing Description. A Thing can be an existing device (or service) augmented by a Thing Description or an entity that that natively implements WoT building blocks (e.g., Protocol Bindings or the Scripting API).

> A physical entity (either a computational device or a real-word object) described by a WoT Thing Description. Examples of Thing include (but are not limited to) sensors, actuators, building spaces, industrial equipment and manufactured products. A Thing can be interacted with via a WoT Servient.

## Servient
An entity that implements WoT building blocks and both consumes Things and exposes one or more Things. Servients usually have multiple Protocol Bindings to enable interaction with different devices. Servients can implement the Scripting API.

> A software agent that implements WoT building blocks and both consumes Thing Descriptions and exposes one or more Thing Description(s). Servients usually have multiple Protocol Bindings to enable interaction with different devices. Servients can implement the Scripting API.

## WoT Server
An entity that exposes a network interface consistent with a WoT Thing Description. A Thing is at least a WoT Server. WoT Server is also used to refer to a Servient in server role only.

> An entity that exposes a network interface consistent with a WoT Thing Description. There exists at least one WoT Server for a Thing. WoT Server is also used to refer to a Servient in server role only.

## WoT Client
An entity that can connect with ("consume") a network interface described by a WoT Thing Description. WoT Clients usually implement multiple Protocol Bindings. WoT Client is also used to refer to a Servient in client role only.

## Binding Templates
A re-usable collection of blueprints for the communication with different IoT platforms. The blueprints includes the required vocabulary for the Thing Description to map Interactions to platform-specific messages as well as implementation notes for the required protocol stacks or dedicated communication drivers.

## Protocol Binding
An implementation of the mapping between Interaction in the TD Interaction Model (e.g., Property read) and specific operations of a protocol (e.g., HTTP GET).

## Application
A running or periodically running process that consumes one or more Things (read and processes there data, control their state) and/or exposes on or more Things (provide access to locally gathered data or computed from consumed Things, provide remote control and management interfaces). The application can be implemented using the Scripting API or native platform APIs. The application may also be distributed over multiple Things and other hosts.

## Scripting API
The application-facing programming interface provided by a Servient; comparable to the Web browser APIs.

## Execution Environment
A sandbox that isolates scripts running on the same Servient.

## Client API
Programming interface that allows scripts to access remote Things over the network, local Things in a different execution environment, or directly attached hardware (which as abstracted as Things).

## Server API
Programming interface that allows scripts to expose local functionality as Things to WoT Clients.

## Exposed Thing
A software object instance created through the Server API that is implemented locally and can be accessed over the network by remote WoT Clients.

## Consumed Thing
A software object instance created through the Client API that represents a remote Thing that is used by the local application.

## Discovery API
Programming interface that allows scripts to discover other Things (local, nearby, or remote).

## Manual Discovery
A discovery method where the URI of the used consumed Thing Descriptions is provided manually (e.g., through user configuration or hard-coding in a script).

## Local Discovery
A discovery method which can discover Things in local networks (e.g. SSDP, mDNS/DNS-SD, ...).

> Matthias: I think we need to distinguish between "local" (i.e., local hardware, same Servient) and "network" (i.e., what is described here)

## Nearby Discovery
A discovery method where the physical location is considered (e.g., BLE, Audio Watermarking, ...).

## Remote Discovery
A discovery method which supports lookup of remote Things also beyond network boundaries, for instance by using a directory service. The endpoint of the directory must be supported.

## TD Repository
A directory service for TDs that provides a Web interface to register TDs (see [draft-ietf-core-resource-directory](https://tools.ietf.org/html/draft-ietf-core-resource-directory)) and look them up (e.g., using SPARQL queries).

## CoAP
Acronym for Constrained Application Protocol [RFC7252]

## JWT
JSON Web Token [RFC7519]

## CWT
CBOR Web Token [draft-ietf-ace-cbor-web-token](https://tools.ietf.org/html/draft-ietf-ace-cbor-web-token)
