proposals/WoT Architecture Explainer.md, before:

# Web of Things Architecture Explained

[//]: # (7.3.2019)

[//]: # (## What’s all this then?
This section header seems chatty and redundant.  The opening can just be the opening.)

[//]: # (A brief, 4-5 paragraph explanation of the feature’s value. Outline what the feature does and how it accomplishes those goals in prose. If your feature creates UI, this is a great place to show mocks and user flows.)

The W3C Web of Things (WoT) was created to enable
interoperability across IoT Platforms and application domains using Web technology.
This is a crucial issue as the specialized needs of IoT services
and the variety of pre-existing standards in the various verticals (application domains)
IoT seeks to integrate has led to severe market fragmentation and
many difficult system integration problems.
By some estimates, 
[up to 40% of the value of the IoT](https://www.mckinsey.com/business-functions/digital-mckinsey/our-insights/the-internet-of-things-the-value-of-digitizing-the-physical-world) 
is only acheivable through interoperabilty.

WoT provides mechanisms to formally describe IoT interfaces
to allow IoT devices and services to communicate with each other,
independent of their underlying implementation, and across multiple
networking protocols. 
In addition WoT offers a standardized way to define and program IoT behavior.

The WoT Architecture Document describes the abstract architecture for the W3C
Web of Things.
It is derived from a set of requirements that were in turn derived
from use cases for multiple application domains.
The architecture can be mapped onto a variety of concrete deployment scenarios, 
several examples of which are given in the document.

The Architecture Document serves as an umbrella for the W3C WoT 
specifications and defines basics such as terminology and the
underlying abstract architecture of the W3C Web of Things. 
Specifically, the purpose of this document is to provide

- a set of use cases the W3C WoT Architecture should satisfy,
- a set of requirements for WoT implementations,
- an overview of the WoT building blocks being standardized
	and their interplay,
- a guide to mapping the abstract architecture onto software
	stacks and hardware components in various deployment scenarios,
- and a summary of some security and privacy considerations 
        to be aware of when implementing WoT building blocks.

The architecture document lays the foundation for the WoT
building block specifications:

- the <a href="https://w3c.github.io/wot-thing-description/">WoT
					Thing Description</a> (REC Track),

- the <a href="https://w3c.github.io/wot-binding-templates/">WoT
					Binding Templates</a>,
- the <a href="https://w3c.github.io/wot-scripting-api/">WoT
					Scripting API</a>, and
- the <a href="https://w3c.github.io/wot-security/">WoT
                Security and Privacy Considerations</a>.

Of these, the security and privacy considerations provide a general
analysis that cross-cuts the other building blocks, each of which also 
include their own specific security and privacy considerations.

## Goals

[//]: # (MK: How will the web be better when this feature launches? And who will it help?)

[//]: # (McCool: it is pretty hard to cleanly divide this into goals and non-goals... maybe this should be one section, "Goals and Non-Goals"?)

For WoT in general the goal is to support existing standards
and make them easier to use and integrate.

The WoT consolidates IoT metadata in WoT Thing Descriptions
to foster interoperability in two ways:
1. By enabling and enhancing machine-to-machine communication, as devices can
   read WoT Thing Descriptions and use the information contained in them
   to automatically adapt to details of a particular protocol, using
   the interaction/protocol binding abstraction.
2. By serving as a common, uniform format for developers to document and
   retrieve all details necessary to access an IoT service and make use of that service's data.

To better support semantic interoperability, WoT Thing Descriptions may
optionally make use of domain-specific vocabularies,
for which explicit extension points are provided.

## Non-goals

[//]: # (MK: You’re not going to solve every problem so enumerate the attractive, nearby problems that are out of scope for this effort. This may include details on the tradeoffs made due to architectural limitations made due to implementation details, and features left out either due to interoperability concerns or other hurdles, and how you plan to improve on this. This can often be the single most important part of your document, so give it careful thought.)

The Web of Things architecture does not put any limitations on use cases and 
application domains. 
It complements existing IoT standards and bridges between them.
In general, W3C WoT is designed to describe what exists rather than to prescribe what to
implement.
This is especially true for security, where the goal is to support
existing mechanisms and properties, not to define new ones.

That said, we have focused on a specific set of existing 
protocol and security standards that are in wide use by IoT devices.
We have limited our targets to standards where resources and interaction
points can be identified by URLs, where the protocols are defined using
well-documented standards,
and for which the structure of data payloads is consistent with JSON 
(this includes XML and CBOR) and/or can be identified with an IANA media type,
and where the interaction style is either request/response, pub/sub, or
a hybrid of these two (eg CRUDN, REST+an event notification mechanism).
The WoT Protocol Bindings targets HTTP, CoAP, and MQTT in particular and
security testing and analysis has also focused on these specific protocols,
although in theory the WoT Thing Description could be extended to other
protocols with the properties noted above.

In general, however, we do not claim that the WoT can be used to describe the
interaction affordances for _any_ IoT protocol.  Instead we have identified
a set of use cases and application domains and have 
then targeted the protocols and common patterns in those use cases and
application domains.

Although the WoT supports Linked Data and domain-specific vocabularies
through extension points in the WoT Thing Description,
defining domain-specific vocabularies themselves is out of scope of the
current WoT standardization activity.

The WoT Thing Description is a JSON document designed to be 
generated and processed in a lightweight manner (an important requirement
for IoT devices) with uncomplicated JSON usage patterns designed to
be comfortable and familiar to web developers. 
A WoT Thing Description is not itself a JSON-LD document.
However, we do provide a mechanism to include semantic contexts and
annotations and a well-defined process to convert WoT Thing Descriptions to JSON-LD 1.0,
and are aligning WoT Thing Descriptions with the work in progress on JSON-LD 1.1.

## Application domains and use cases

A set of use cases in a set of IoT application domains were used to drive the 
requirements for the WoT architecture.
These use cases were chosen to be typical of IoT applications but were not meant
to be exhaustive.
Rather, the use cases served as concrete illustrations or exemplars,
where connected things using WoT could provide additional benefit or enable new scenarios.

Application domains and use considered included 
consumer (lights, window blinds, energy management), 
smart factory (equipment monitoring, failure prediction, poisonous gas detection,
vehicle tracking, shipment tracking, meter reading, distributed energy resource (DER)
management, storage tank monitoring), 
insurance (usage tracking, predictive weather monitoring),
agriculture (soil condition monitoring and planning, production monitoring),
healthcare (clinical trial data collection, remote patient monitoring),
environment (pollution monitoring),
smart cities and buildings (infrastructure monitoring, traffic monitoring and signage, street lights, building energy optimization),
and 
connected car (service prediction, road condition early warning).

## Key scenarios and common patterns

[//]: # (McCool: The purpose of this section is the same as the "common patterns" section of the architecture doc, so let's summarize that here; I have modified the title to capture both ideas)

[//]: # (MK: Next, discuss the key scenarios which move beyond the most canonical example,
showing how they are addressed using example code:
…
Scenario 1
Outline the scenario, then provide:
…
[sample code that demonstrates the feature]
…
Scenario 2
Outline the scenario, then provide:
…
[sample code that demonstrates the feature]
)


**TODO; really, this is the "Common Patterns"**

## Requirements

**TODO.   This is NOT one of the sections in the template but should be included to follow the process we have defined and the progression from use cases through to architectural definitions.**

## Detailed design discussion

[//]: # (Tricky design choice #1
Talk through the tradeoffs in coming to the specific design point you want to make, hopefully:
[illustrated with example code]
…
[Tricky design choice N …]
)

The architecture document defines a common WoT Architecture and serves as an entry point and
introduction to several other documents defining the WoT Building Blocks.

### Common Architecture
Based on the application domains and use cases, and the requirements derived from these,
a common abstract architecture has been defined for WoT systems.  
This abstract architecture is broad enough to include many existing IoT systems and standards.
This is intentional since, in order to combat fragmentation,
the WoT approach is designed to allow the construction of IoT
systems composed of devices and services supporting many standards, platforms, and protocols
in multiple verticals.
The abstract architecture also defines a set of reference patterns and terminology that can
be used to avoid confusion when describing a WoT system.

The main requirement for an IoT device or service to operate as part of a WoT system 
(and be considered a "WoT Thing") is that _it must be described in a WoT Thing Description_.
The WoT Thing Description provides basic metadata about a WoT Thing, 
such as a name, description, and 
id, and also provides all the metadata needed to interact with a device.

The Web of Things defines specific building blocks to allow the implementation of systems that
conform with the abstract WoT Architecture.
The specifics of these building blocks are defined in separate documents; 
this document provides an overview and a summary.
However, first we will define the abstract architectural aspects that
these building blocks cover.

A WoT Thing has four architectural aspects of interest:
its behavior,
its interactions,
the specific additional information needed by a client
to implement each interaction in a concrete protocol
(what we will call the protocol binding),
and its security configuration.

<img src="../images/wot-building-blocks.png"/>

The behavior aspect of a WoT Thing 
includes both lifecycle management
(onboarding, updating, decommissioning, etc) and
its operational behavior.
Operational behaviour includes autonomous activity and computation,
network interactions, sensing, and actuation during "normal operation".

The interaction aspect of a Thing can be described in terms
of generic and abstract operations like setting and getting a property, 
invoking an action, or subscribing to an event notification, among others.
The WoT architecture separates these abstract interactions from their implementation in 
particular protocols in order to enhance interoperability.
A single WoT Thing may, in general, use multiple protocols,
including but not limited to HTTP, CoAP, and MQTT.
These protocols are used both to support a WoT Thing's own interactions 
(as a server) and to connect to other WoT Things (as a client).
Some of these protocols use the request-response model,
others support a subscribe-publish model.
The latter is especially important for low-power devices
and use cases requiring timely event notifications.

[//]: # (McCool: I took this out, as we won't really need it here...
We define the term "servient" for devices or services,
such as WoT Things, that can be either a server/publisher,
a client/subscriber, or both.) 

Protocol bindings augment each interaction with the additional detail needed to implement it
with a particular concrete protocol.

The security configuration aspect represents the mechanisms
used to control access to the affordances and the 
management of related public and private metadata.
WoT Things in general also need to maintain their own integrity
and the integrity and confidentiality of the data they manage,
and limit access to interactions to authenticated
and authorized users, devices, and services.

### Building Blocks

[//]: # (McCool: this was previously taken out as being "OLD" but it is
actually important to include since the previous section only talks about
architectural aspects to consider, NOT the actual building blocks!)

The WoT Building Blocks support each of the architectural aspects discussed
in the previous section
and are the actual focus of our standardization effort.
Each of these building blocks is defined in a separate document.
The following figure outlines how these building blocks relate to
each of the architectural aspects discussed above.  Note that
building blocks do not map 1:1 to these architectural aspects.
The WoT Thing Description in particular connects in some
way to all the aspects.

<img src="../images/wot-thing-with-scripting.png"/>

#### WoT Thing Description
The primary building block is the
<a href="https://w3c.github.io/wot-thing-description/">WoT Thing Description</a>,
which encodes metadata about the WoT Thing (name, identifier, version, etc.),
links to related entities,
its set of interactions,
data schemas and protocol bindings for those interactions,
and public security metadata.

[//]: # (McCool: Do we need this?
We define the term Interaction Affordances to refer to the metadata describing the interactions supported by a WoT Thing.)

A WoT Thing Description also supports but does not require RDF/JSON-LD
(<a href="https://www.w3.org/standards/semanticweb/data">Linked Data</a>)
processing and semantic annotation and inteferencing.

#### WoT Scripting API
A second (optional) building block is the WoT Scripting API.
This building block allows the definition of the behavior
of a WoT Thing (responses to interactions) as well as
the Consumption (parsing and use)
and Exposure (construction and publication) of
WoT Thing Descriptions.
This building block is optional because devices can choose to
implement behaviors and construct or consume WoT Thing Descriptions by other
means than using the WoT Scripting API.
In particular, WoT Thing Descriptions do not need to be be provided
by the device itself, but can be provided separately (for example by
a web service or database).
This is necessary for supporting brownfield (pre-existing)
devices and services.
However, the WoT Scripting API can be used to simplify and support the development of
*new* WoT Things or services that need to connect to WoT Things.
The WoT Scripting API specification targets implementation in JavaScript
and is consistent with both browser and server use cases,
although the focus is on its use in devices and services.

#### WoT Binding Templates
The IoT uses a variety of protocols for accessing devices, since no
one protocol is appropriate in all contexts. Thus, a central
challenge for the Web of Things is to enable interactions with the
plethora of different _IoT Platforms_ (e.g., OCF, oneM2M, OMA
LWM2M, OPC-UA, etc.) and RESTful devices that do not follow any
particular standard, but provide an interface over standardized protocols
such as HTTP, CoAP, or MQTT.

WoT is tackling this variety by supporting the encoding of protocol
binding details in the WoT Thing Description but also
by publishing an informational document, the
<a href="https://w3c.github.io/wot-binding-templates/">WoT Binding Templates</a>.
This building block provides a collection of communication metadata blueprints
that explain how to encode the metadata needed to interact with different IoT platforms.
in a WoT Thing Description.

#### WoT Security and Privacy Considerations
The final building block is security, which is a cross-cutting concern.
IoT devices and services generally have strong security and privacy requirements,
and the WoT Architecture deals with this aspect of WoT systems in several ways.

First, the WoT Thing Description itself supports the description of public
security metadata so that consumers of a WoT Thing know what mechanisms they
need to support to gain access.
This follows security best practices
of documenting security mechanisms and controlling access through specific
private information (eg keys) rather than depending on security through obscurity.

Second, the WoT Scripting API is designed to not have direct access to
private keying information.  This must be provisioned separately.

Third, general security and privacy considerations, testing,
and best practices are covered in separate publications.

## Considered alternatives (MK)

[//]: # (One of the most important things you can do in your design process is to catalog the set of roads not taken. As you iterate on your design, you may find that major choices in your approach or API style will be revisited and enumerating the full space of alternatives can help you apply one [or more] of them later, may serve as a “graveyard” for u-turns in your design, and can give reviewers and potential users confidence that you’ve got your ducks in a row.)

**TODO**

## References & acknowledgements

[//]: # (Your design will change and be informed by many people; acknowledge them in an ongoing way! It helps build community and, as we only get by through the contributions of many, is only fair.)

[//]: # (McCool: Perhaps link to the various github repos as well?)

The "Web of Things" (WoT) started as an academic initiative in the
form of publications and, from 2010 to 2017, 
a yearly [International Workshop on the Web of Things](https://webofthings.org/events/wot/). 
The first <a href="https://www.w3.org/2014/02/wot/">W3C Web of Things Workshop</a>
was held in 2014 with the goal of further examining the potential for open standards
as a basis for IoT services.
Based on the interest generated by this workshop, the
W3C chartered a Web of Things Interest Group in 2015 to
identify technological building blocks for Recommendation Track
standardization.
The W3C Web of Things Working Group was chartered in late 2016 to
work on standards for the identified building blocks.
The current set of proposals was tested with a focus on enhanced interoperability over the 
course of multiple plugfests over the several years since the creation of the WoT
Interest Group and Working Group.
Dozens of companies have been involved and have produced and tested numerous implementations.

Many thanks to Kazuyuki Ashimura, Matthias Kovatsch, 
Michael McCool, Michael Lagally, Ryuichi Matsukura, Toru Kawaguchi, 
Kazuaki Nimura, Kunihiko Toumura, Elena Reshetova, Zoltan Kis and Kazuo Kajimoto 
for their contributions to this document.

Numerous other people have contributed with input, discussions and review feedback,
and it is impossible to acknowledge them all - Many thanks for all comments and discussions
that helped to create the WoT architecture.

Commit message:

add key scenarios/common patterns section

proposals/WoT Architecture Explainer.md, after:

# Web of Things Architecture Explained

[//]: # (7.3.2019)

[//]: # (## What’s all this then?
This section header seems chatty and redundant.  The opening can just be the opening.)

[//]: # (A brief, 4-5 paragraph explanation of the feature’s value. Outline what the feature does and how it accomplishes those goals in prose. If your feature creates UI, this is a great place to show mocks and user flows.)

The W3C Web of Things (WoT) was created to enable
interoperability across IoT Platforms and application domains using Web technology.
This is a crucial issue as the specialized needs of IoT services
and the variety of pre-existing standards in the various verticals (application domains)
IoT seeks to integrate has led to severe market fragmentation and
many difficult system integration problems.
By some estimates, 
[up to 40% of the value of the IoT](https://www.mckinsey.com/business-functions/digital-mckinsey/our-insights/the-internet-of-things-the-value-of-digitizing-the-physical-world) 
is only acheivable through interoperabilty.

WoT provides mechanisms to formally describe IoT interfaces
to allow IoT devices and services to communicate with each other,
independent of their underlying implementation, and across multiple
networking protocols. 
In addition WoT offers a standardized way to define and program IoT behavior.

The WoT Architecture Document describes the abstract architecture for the W3C
Web of Things.
It is derived from a set of requirements that were in turn derived
from use cases for multiple application domains.
The architecture can be mapped onto a variety of concrete deployment scenarios, 
several examples of which are given in the document.

The Architecture Document serves as an umbrella for the W3C WoT 
specifications and defines basics such as terminology and the
underlying abstract architecture of the W3C Web of Things. 
Specifically, the purpose of this document is to provide

- a set of use cases the W3C WoT Architecture should satisfy,
- a set of requirements for WoT implementations,
- an overview of the WoT building blocks being standardized
	and their interplay,
- a guide to mapping the abstract architecture onto software
	stacks and hardware components in various deployment scenarios,
- and a summary of some security and privacy considerations 
        to be aware of when implementing WoT building blocks.

The architecture document lays the foundation for the WoT
building block specifications:

- the <a href="https://w3c.github.io/wot-thing-description/">WoT
					Thing Description</a> (REC Track),

- the <a href="https://w3c.github.io/wot-binding-templates/">WoT
					Binding Templates</a>,
- the <a href="https://w3c.github.io/wot-scripting-api/">WoT
					Scripting API</a>, and
- the <a href="https://w3c.github.io/wot-security/">WoT
                Security and Privacy Considerations</a>.

Of these, the security and privacy considerations provide a general
analysis that cross-cuts the other building blocks, each of which also 
include their own specific security and privacy considerations.

## Goals

[//]: # (MK: How will the web be better when this feature launches? And who will it help?)

[//]: # (McCool: it is pretty hard to cleanly divide this into goals and non-goals... maybe this should be one section, "Goals and Non-Goals"?)

For WoT in general the goal is to support existing standards
and make them easier to use and integrate.

The WoT consolidates IoT metadata in WoT Thing Descriptions
to foster interoperability in two ways:
1. By enabling and enhancing machine-to-machine communication, as devices can
   read WoT Thing Descriptions and use the information contained in them
   to automatically adapt to details of a particular protocol, using
   the interaction/protocol binding abstraction.
2. By serving as a common, uniform format for developers to document and
   retrieve all details necessary to access an IoT service and make use of that service's data.

To better support semantic interoperability, WoT Thing Descriptions may
optionally make use of domain-specific vocabularies,
for which explicit extension points are provided.

## Non-goals

[//]: # (MK: You’re not going to solve every problem so enumerate the attractive, nearby problems that are out of scope for this effort. This may include details on the tradeoffs made due to architectural limitations made due to implementation details, and features left out either due to interoperability concerns or other hurdles, and how you plan to improve on this. This can often be the single most important part of your document, so give it careful thought.)

The Web of Things architecture does not put any limitations on use cases and 
application domains. 
It complements existing IoT standards and bridges between them.
In general, W3C WoT is designed to describe what exists rather than to prescribe what to
implement.
This is especially true for security, where the goal is to support
existing mechanisms and properties, not to define new ones.

That said, we have focused on a specific set of existing 
protocol and security standards that are in wide use by IoT devices.
We have limited our targets to standards where resources and interaction
points can be identified by URLs, where the protocols are defined using
well-documented standards,
and for which the structure of data payloads is consistent with JSON 
(this includes XML and CBOR) and/or can be identified with an IANA media type,
and where the interaction style is either request/response, pub/sub, or
a hybrid of these two (eg CRUDN, REST+an event notification mechanism).
The WoT Protocol Bindings targets HTTP, CoAP, and MQTT in particular and
security testing and analysis has also focused on these specific protocols,
although in theory the WoT Thing Description could be extended to other
protocols with the properties noted above.

In general, however, we do not claim that the WoT can be used to describe the
interaction affordances for _any_ IoT protocol.  Instead we have identified
a set of use cases and application domains and have 
then targeted the protocols and common patterns in those use cases and
application domains.

Although the WoT supports Linked Data and domain-specific vocabularies
through extension points in the WoT Thing Description,
defining domain-specific vocabularies themselves is out of scope of the
current WoT standardization activity.

The WoT Thing Description is a JSON document designed to be 
generated and processed in a lightweight manner (an important requirement
for IoT devices) with uncomplicated JSON usage patterns designed to
be comfortable and familiar to web developers. 
A WoT Thing Description is not itself a JSON-LD document.
However, we do provide a mechanism to include semantic contexts and
annotations and a well-defined process to convert WoT Thing Descriptions to JSON-LD 1.0,
and are aligning WoT Thing Descriptions with the work in progress on JSON-LD 1.1.

## Application domains and use cases

A set of use cases in a set of IoT application domains were used to drive the 
requirements for the WoT architecture.
These use cases were chosen to be typical of IoT applications but were not meant
to be exhaustive.
Rather, the use cases served as concrete illustrations or exemplars,
where connected things using WoT could provide additional benefit or enable new scenarios.

Application domains and use considered included 
consumer (lights, window blinds, energy management), 
smart factory (equipment monitoring, failure prediction, poisonous gas detection,
vehicle tracking, shipment tracking, meter reading, distributed energy resource (DER)
management, storage tank monitoring), 
insurance (usage tracking, predictive weather monitoring),
agriculture (soil condition monitoring and planning, production monitoring),
healthcare (clinical trial data collection, remote patient monitoring),
environment (pollution monitoring),
smart cities and buildings (infrastructure monitoring, traffic monitoring and signage, street lights, building energy optimization),
and 
connected car (service prediction, road condition early warning).

## Key scenarios and common patterns

Analysis of the use cases resulted in a set of common patterns of
network and device configuration summarized in the following figure, which
combines many of the patterns.  IoT services are often composed of services 
running in the cloud and on gateways as well as on the actual devices.
User interfaces are often exposed via the web or through applications on
mobile devices such as phones.  
Devices themselves might be mobile and so their network location should
not be tied to their physical location nor should such devices be
treated as being continuously connected; an example is the connected car.
Devices are often located behind firewalls and
NATs in which case proxies may be required for traversal and visibility
outside the local network.  Digital twins may be required to mirror state
for devices that are not continuously online for power-saving, mobility, or other reasons.
Many usage scenarios involving timely action in the case of alerts
require the use of "push" event notification and cannot rely
on pure request/response patterns driven by the client.

<img src="../images/arch-use-case-overview.png"/>

## Requirements

**TODO.   This is NOT one of the sections in the template but should be included to follow the process we have defined and the progression from use cases through to architectural definitions.**

## Detailed design discussion

The architecture document defines a common WoT Architecture and serves as an entry point and
introduction to several other documents defining the WoT Building Blocks.

### Common Architecture
Based on the application domains and use cases, and the requirements derived from these,
a common abstract architecture has been defined for WoT systems.
This abstract architecture is broad enough to include many existing IoT systems and standards.
This is intentional since, in order to combat fragmentation,
the WoT approach is designed to allow the construction of IoT
systems composed of devices and services supporting many standards, platforms, and protocols
in multiple verticals.
The abstract architecture also defines a set of reference patterns and terminology that can
be used to avoid confusion when describing a WoT system.

The main requirement for an IoT device or service to operate as part of a WoT system 
(and be considered a "WoT Thing") is that _it must be described in a WoT Thing Description_.
The WoT Thing Description provides basic metadata about a WoT Thing, 
such as a name, description, and 
id, and also provides all the metadata needed to interact with a device.

The Web of Things defines specific building blocks to allow the implementation of systems that
conform with the abstract WoT Architecture.
The specifics of these building blocks are defined in separate documents; 
this document provides an overview and a summary.
However, first we will define the abstract architectural aspects that
these building blocks cover.

A WoT Thing has four architectural aspects of interest:
its behavior,
its interactions,
the specific additional information needed by a client
to implement each interaction in a concrete protocol
(what we will call the protocol binding),
and its security configuration.

<img src="../images/wot-building-blocks.png"/>

The behavior aspect of a WoT Thing 
includes both lifecycle management
(onboarding, updating, decommissioning, etc) and
its operational behavior.
Operational behaviour includes autonomous activity and computation,
network interactions, sensing, and actuation during "normal operation".

The interaction aspect of a Thing can be described in terms
of generic and abstract operations like setting and getting a property, 
invoking an action, or subscribing to an event notification, among others.
The WoT architecture separates these abstract interactions from their implementation in 
particular protocols in order to enhance interoperability.
A single WoT Thing may, in general, use multiple protocols,
including but not limited to HTTP, CoAP, and MQTT.
These protocols are used both to support a WoT Thing's own interactions 
(as a server) and to connect to other WoT Things (as a client).
Some of these protocols use the request-response model,
others support a subscribe-publish model.
The latter is especially important for low-power devices
and use cases requiring timely event notifications.

[//]: # (McCool: I took this out, as we won't really need it here...
We define the term "servient" for devices or services,
such as WoT Things, that can be either a server/publisher,
a client/subscriber, or both.) 

Protocol bindings augment each interaction with the additional detail needed to implement it
with a particular concrete protocol.

The security configuration aspect represents the mechanisms
used to control access to the affordances and the 
management of related public and private metadata.
WoT Things in general also need to maintain their own integrity
and the integrity and confidentiality of the data they manage,
and limit access to interactions to authenticated
and authorized users, devices, and services.

### Building Blocks

[//]: # (McCool: this was previously taken out as being "OLD" but it is
actually important to include since the previous section only talks about
architectural aspects to consider, NOT the actual building blocks!)

The WoT Building Blocks support each of the architectural aspects discussed
in the previous section
and are the actual focus of our standardization effort.
Each of these building blocks is defined in a separate document.
The following figure outlines how these building blocks relate to
each of the architectural aspects discussed above.  Note that
building blocks do not map 1:1 to these architectural aspects.
The WoT Thing Description in particular connects in some
way to all the aspects.

<img src="../images/wot-thing-with-scripting.png"/>

#### WoT Thing Description
The primary building block is the
<a href="https://w3c.github.io/wot-thing-description/">WoT Thing Description</a>,
which encodes metadata about the WoT Thing (name, identifier, version, etc.),
links to related entities,
its set of interactions,
data schemas and protocol bindings for those interactions,
and public security metadata.

[//]: # (McCool: Do we need this?
We define the term Interaction Affordances to refer to the metadata describing the interactions supported by a WoT Thing.)

A WoT Thing Description also supports but does not require RDF/JSON-LD
(<a href="https://www.w3.org/standards/semanticweb/data">Linked Data</a>)
processing and semantic annotation and inteferencing.

#### WoT Scripting API
A second (optional) building block is the WoT Scripting API.
This building block allows the definition of the behavior
of a WoT Thing (responses to interactions) as well as
the Consumption (parsing and use)
and Exposure (construction and publication) of
WoT Thing Descriptions.
This building block is optional because devices can choose to
implement behaviors and construct or consume WoT Thing Descriptions by other
means than using the WoT Scripting API.
In particular, WoT Thing Descriptions do not need to be be provided
by the device itself, but can be provided separately (for example by
a web service or database).
This is necessary for supporting brownfield (pre-existing)
devices and services.
However, the WoT Scripting API can be used to simplify and support the development of
*new* WoT Things or services that need to connect to WoT Things.
The WoT Scripting API specification targets implementation in JavaScript
and is consistent with both browser and server use cases,
although the focus is on its use in devices and services.

#### WoT Binding Templates
The IoT uses a variety of protocols for accessing devices, since no
one protocol is appropriate in all contexts. Thus, a central
challenge for the Web of Things is to enable interactions with the
plethora of different _IoT Platforms_ (e.g., OCF, oneM2M, OMA
LWM2M, OPC-UA, etc.) and RESTful devices that do not follow any
particular standard, but provide an interface over standardized protocols
such as HTTP, CoAP, or MQTT.

WoT is tackling this variety by supporting the encoding of protocol
binding details in the WoT Thing Description but also
by publishing an informational document, the
<a href="https://w3c.github.io/wot-binding-templates/">WoT Binding Templates</a>.
This building block provides a collection of communication metadata blueprints
that explain how to encode the metadata needed to interact with different IoT platforms.
in a WoT Thing Description.

#### WoT Security and Privacy Considerations
The final building block is security, which is a cross-cutting concern.
IoT devices and services generally have strong security and privacy requirements,
and the WoT Architecture deals with this aspect of WoT systems in several ways.

First, the WoT Thing Description itself supports the description of public
security metadata so that consumers of a WoT Thing know what mechanisms they
need to support to gain access.
This follows security best practices
of documenting security mechanisms and controlling access through specific
private information (eg keys) rather than depending on security through obscurity.

Second, the WoT Scripting API is designed to not have direct access to
private keying information.  This must be provisioned separately.

Third, general security and privacy considerations, testing,
and best practices are covered in separate publications.

## Considered alternatives (MK)

[//]: # (One of the most important things you can do in your design process is to catalog the set of roads not taken. As you iterate on your design, you may find that major choices in your approach or API style will be revisited and enumerating the full space of alternatives can help you apply one [or more] of them later, may serve as a “graveyard” for u-turns in your design, and can give reviewers and potential users confidence that you’ve got your ducks in a row.)

**TODO**

## References & acknowledgements

[//]: # (Your design will change and be informed by many people; acknowledge them in an ongoing way! It helps build community and, as we only get by through the contributions of many, is only fair.)

[//]: # (McCool: Perhaps link to the various github repos as well?)

The "Web of Things" (WoT) started as an academic initiative in the
form of publications and, from 2010 to 2017, 
a yearly [International Workshop on the Web of Things](https://webofthings.org/events/wot/). 
The first <a href="https://www.w3.org/2014/02/wot/">W3C Web of Things Workshop</a>
was held in 2014 with the goal of further examining the potential for open standards
as a basis for IoT services.
Based on the interest generated by this workshop, the
W3C chartered a Web of Things Interest Group in 2015 to
identify technological building blocks for Recommendation Track
standardization.
The W3C Web of Things Working Group was chartered in late 2016 to
work on standards for the identified building blocks.
The current set of proposals was tested with a focus on enhanced interoperability over the 
course of multiple plugfests over the several years since the creation of the WoT
Interest Group and Working Group.
Dozens of companies have been involved and have produced and tested numerous implementations.

Many thanks to Kazuyuki Ashimura, Matthias Kovatsch, 
Michael McCool, Michael Lagally, Ryuichi Matsukura, Toru Kawaguchi, 
Kazuaki Nimura, Kunihiko Toumura, Elena Reshetova, Zoltan Kis and Kazuo Kajimoto 
for their contributions to this document.

Numerous other people have contributed with input, discussions and review feedback,
and it is impossible to acknowledge them all - Many thanks for all comments and discussions
that helped to create the WoT architecture.
